welcome back to the show now seeing the
beauty and natural raw materials
sometimes requires artistic talent
woodturning masterfully crafted vessels
is how one artist brings out the natural
beauty of his most cherished element
wood
Wood is a very easy medium to work with
sensuous I believe it has a warmth to it
and it has the ability to create unique
shapes and forms which is what I really
strive for it
for woodturner bill Haskell the unique
shapes he strives for are already in the
raw of wood he works with just waiting
to be discovered
I look for interesting characteristics
and then decide based on the size of the
wood what kind of form that you know
size lends itself to once bill has
selected a choice log he marks it with a
circle so that the piece will include
contrasting areas of light and dark in
the wood he cuts a rough circle from the
wood then mounts it on a lathe for
shaping I'm inspired by classical shapes
I'm inspired by modern contemporary
shapes and I eye and organic shapes I
try to take those three elements and
work those into my creations Phil begins
sanding the wood using a palm sander
first then finishing with sandpaper
to see all the smooth surface he coats
it with nail glue after the piece is
fully sanded I applied glue to give it a
sealer coat if you will that really
seals in and enhances the color of the
wood and gives a good hard protective
finish later on I'll put some lacquer
coats on it but that gives a good base
for the lacquer
but the outside finished bill begins to
hollow out the piece he starts with a
one-inch hole that goes almost to the
bottom of the piece and then widens it
carefully measuring the thickness of the
walls he is creating
when we get down to a wall thickness of
maybe half an inch or or less the
thickness of the wall starts to become
critical and after you put four or five
hours into the piece you certainly don't
want to go through the wall to keep that
from happening bill uses a laser beam to
help measure the distance between the
cutting edge of the tool and the desired
thickness of the wall you can gauge as
you're cutting into the wall the second
to that red dot falls off the edge that
you've gone to a wall thickness that you
desired once he has the right thickness
it may look like a finished piece but
bill takes the process one step further
one of my desires when I'm creating the
piece there's number one to create a
very distinctive and interesting shape
now once I've done that any good
woodturner can do that so the question
is what's additional can you do to make
this even a more interesting and unique
piece
and I've come up with this design that I
call pebble mosaic where I carve pebble
II shaped holes into a mosaic pattern
sometimes freeform sometimes otherwise
into the piece to give it some very
unique interest bill draw shapes
resembling pebbles on to his vessel then
drills pilot holes into each one with a
hand drill before carving away the
excess wood with a micro die grinder
each hole is then sanded smooth creating
a lacework effect in the wood and
creating art out of a material we often
take for granted
what turning over the last twenty to
thirty years has evolved into a whole
new art form that didn't exist before
and I think that's exciting and I'm glad
to be a part of it
since that fascinating I've not seen any
would work like that well we're glad
Bill's a part of it too
Bill's pieces range in price from 250 to
700 dollars and they can be found on the
Internet